[2.7] UI guide update (#2681)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-ui.md

> A notable feature of Apache Airflow is the [user interface (UI)](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/ui.html), which provides insights into your DAGs and DAG runs. The UI is a useful tool for understanding, monitoring, and troubleshooting your pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main features of Airflow is its [user interface (UI)](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/ui.html), which provides insights into your DAGs and DAG runs. The UI is essential for understanding, monitoring, and troubleshooting your pipelines.
```

- **Mark state as...**: This button allows you to mark the selected DAG run, task group instance or task instance as successful or failed without running it. This option is often useful when the root cause of a task failure was fixed manually in the external data tool and there's no need to rerun the task. Many data teams leverage [Task Instance Notes and DAG Run Notes](rerunning-dags#add-notes-to-cleared-tasks-and-dags) in order to document the reason for marking a task instance as failed or successful.
- **Clear Task Filter**: This button allows you to filter the tasks shown in the **Grid** view based on task dependencies. For example, when you select **Filter downstream**, the UI shows only the tasks downstream of your selected task. 

![Grid filter](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_filter.gif)

There are 4 tabs available within the **Grid** view:

- **Details**: Shows more details about the DAG, DAG run or task instance.
- **Graph**: Shows a graph representation of the DAG.
- **Gantt**: Shows the duration of each task instance in a DAG run as a Gantt chart.
- **Code**: Shows the DAG code.

:::tip

> In Airflow 2.7 keyboard shortcuts where added to the **Grid** view. You can see all available shortcuts by pressing `shift` + `/` while in the **Grid** view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Airflow 2.7 and later, the **Grid** view includes keyboard shortcuts. You can see all available shortcuts by pressing `shift` + `/` while in the **Grid** view.
```

![Grid graph](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_graph.gif)

:::note

Earlier Airflow versions had a different **Graph** view that was not integrated into the **Grid** view. See the [Airflow documentation of your version](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.6.3/ui.html#graph-view) for more information.

:::

### Code

Under the **Code** tab you can access the code that generates the DAG you are viewing. While your code should live in source control, the **Code** tab provides a quick insight into what is going on in the DAG. DAG code can't be edited in the UI.

![Grid code](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_code.png)

This tab shows code only from the file that generated the DAG. It does not show any code that may be imported in the DAG, such as custom hooks or operators or code in your `/include` directory.

### Logs

To access the [logs](logging.md#log-locations) of a specific task instance, click on the **Logs** tab which appears in the **Grid** view, as soon as you select a task instance.

![Grid logs](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_logs.gif)

> ## Additional DAG views

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Additional DAG views
```

Reviewer: Feel free to override, but it felt weird to me to have a section called "Additional DAG views" and then say "We're not discussing these DAG views". It might be better as a note

There are some additional DAG views that are available, but not discussed in this guide:

- **Calendar** view: Shows the state of DAG runs overlaid on a calendar. States are represented by color. If there were multiple DAG runs on the same day with different states, the color is a gradient between green (success) and red (failure).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     ![Calendar View](/img/guides/2_4_CalendarView.png)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I know its a new feature, but it feels a bit out of place to have a screenshot just for this tab and not others.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- **Task Duration:** Shows a line graph of the duration of each task over time.
- **Task Tries:** Shows a line graph of the number of tries for each task in a DAG run over time.
- **Landing Times:** Shows a line graph of the time of day each task started over time.
- **Details:** Shows details of the DAG configuration and DagModel debug information.
- **Audit Log:** Shows selected events for all DAG runs.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::

```

- **Gantt**: Shows the duration of each task instance in a DAG run as a Gantt chart.
- **Code**: Shows the DAG code.

### Details

The **Details** tab displays information about the DAG, individual DAG runs and in-depth information about each task instance. In the **Details** tab you will for example find the total historic runs of a DAG, the data interval start of a DAG run or the duration of a task instance. 

In order to access the details of a specific DAG run or task instance, you need first need to select it in the grid, as shown in the following gif:

![Grid view details](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_details.gif)

When you select a task instance in the **Grid** view, four additional options appear underneath the tabs:

![Grid view task instance](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_ti_options.png)

- **More Details:**  Shows the fully rendered task - an exact summary of what the task does (attributes, values, templates, etc.).
- **Rendered Template:** Shows the task's metadata after it has been templated.
- **XCom:** Shows XComs created by that particular task instance.
- **List Instances, all runs:** Shows a historical view of task instances and statuses for that particular task.

> ### Actions

Reviewer: Not a fan of this appearing alongside the other headers for tab names, because my first thought was "There's an Actions tab in the Airflow UI"? I'd prefer that we bring this information up to the base "Grid view" topic because you can access those buttons from any page.

> When a DAG run, task instance or [task group](task-groups.md) instance is selected in the **Grid** view several action buttons appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a DAG run, task instance, or [task group](task-groups.md) instance is selected in the **Grid** view, several action buttons appear:
```

![Grid actions](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_actions.png)

> - **Clear** / **Clear task** : This button will clear the selected DAG run, task group instance or task instance and run it again. This is useful if you want to re-run a task or DAG run that has failed or during local development. After clicking **Clear task** you will be offered a detailed interface controlling which task instances should be cleared and rerun. See [Manually rerun tasks or DAGs](rerunning-dags.md#manually-rerun-tasks-or-dags).
> - **Mark state as...**: This button allows you to mark the selected DAG run, task group instance or task instance as successful or failed without actually running it. This option is often used when the root cause of a task failure was fixed manually in the target data tool and the pipeline should continue after that task without rerunning it. Many data teams leverage [Task Instance Notes and DAG Run Notes](rerunning-dags#add-notes-to-cleared-tasks-and-dags) in order to document the reason for marking a task instance as failed or successful.
> - **Clear Task Filter**: This button allows you to filter the tasks shown in the **Grid** view based on task dependencies. For example, by selecting **Filter downstream** only the tasks downstream of your selected task will show. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Clear** / **Clear task** : This button will clear the selected DAG run, task group instance, or task instance and run it again. This is useful if you want to re-run a task or DAG run that has failed or during local development. After clicking **Clear task** you will be offered a detailed interface controlling which task instances should be cleared and rerun. See [Manually rerun tasks or DAGs](rerunning-dags.md#manually-rerun-tasks-or-dags).
- **Mark state as...**: This button allows you to mark the selected DAG run, task group instanc,e or task instance as successful or failed without running it. This option is often useful when the root cause of a task failure was fixed manually in the external data tool and there's no need to rerun the task. Many data teams leverage [Task Instance Notes and DAG Run Notes](rerunning-dags#add-notes-to-cleared-tasks-and-dags) in order to document the reason for marking a task instance as failed or successful.
- **Clear Task Filter**: This button allows you to filter the tasks shown in the **Grid** view based on task dependencies. For example, when you select **Filter downstream**, the UI shows only the tasks downstream of your selected task. 
```

![Grid graph](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_graph.gif)

:::note

Earlier Airflow versions had a different **Graph** view that was not integrated into the **Grid** view. See the [Airflow documentation of your version](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.6.3/ui.html#graph-view) for more information.

:::

### Code

Under the **Code** tab you can access the code that generates the DAG you are viewing. While your code should live in source control, the **Code** tab provides a quick insight into what is going on in the DAG. DAG code can't be edited in the UI.

![Grid code](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_code.png)

This tab shows code only from the file that generated the DAG. It does not show any code that may be imported in the DAG, such as custom hooks or operators or code in your `/include` directory.

### Logs

To access the [logs](logging.md#log-locations) of a specific task instance, click on the **Logs** tab which appears in the **Grid** view, as soon as you select a task instance.

![Grid logs](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_logs.gif)

> ### Keyboard shortcuts

Reviewer: Might be worth making this a `:::tip`?

In Airflow 2.7 keyboard shortcuts where added to the **Grid** view. You can see all available shortcuts by pressing `shift` + `/` while in the **Grid** view.

![Grid view shortcuts](/img/guides/airflow-ui_shortcuts.png)

> ## Additional DAG views

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be the last section?

Reviewer 2: It's where it is because it is describing other views that apply to individual DAGs, similar to the grid view, graph view, etc. Whereas everything that follows applies to the entire Airflow instance (cluster activity, datasets, etc.). So the flow is dag-specific views -> airflow instance views. Eventually, these other DAG views will also be tabs in the grid view and we can make this a subsection.

The following are the additional DAG views that are available, but not discussed in this guide:

- **Calendar** view: Shows the state of DAG runs overlaid on a calendar. States are represented by color. If there were multiple DAG runs on the same day with different states, the color is a gradient between green (success) and red (failure).

> ![Calendar View](/img/guides/2_4_CalendarView.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Calendar View](/img/guides/2_4_CalendarView.png)
```

## DAGs

The **DAGs** view is the landing page when you sign in to Airflow. It shows a list of all your DAGs, the status of recent DAG runs and tasks, the time of the last DAG run, and basic metadata about the DAG like the owner and the schedule. To see the status of the DAGs update in real time, toggle **Auto-refresh**.

![DAGs View](/img/guides/airflow-ui_DAGs_overview.png)

In the DAGs view you can:

- Pause/unpause a DAG with the toggle to the left of the DAG name.
- Filter the list of DAGs to show active, paused, or all DAGs.
- Filter the list of DAGs to show currently running DAGs or DAGs that failed their last DAG run.
- Trigger or delete a DAG with the buttons in the Actions section.
- Navigate quickly to other DAG-specific pages from the Links section.

To see more information about a specific DAG, click its name or use one of the links.

## Grid view

> The **Grid** view is the main DAG view and gives you detailed insights into a specific DAG, its DAG runs and tasks. When running the DAG, toggle **Auto-refresh** to see the status of the tasks update in real time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **Grid** view is the main DAG view and gives you detailed insights into a specific DAG, including its DAG runs and task instances. When running the DAG, toggle **Auto-refresh** to see the status of the tasks update in real time.
```

![Grid view details](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_details.gif)

When you select a task instance in the **Grid** view, four additional options appear underneath the tabs:

![Grid view task instance](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_ti_options.png)

- **More Details:**  Shows the fully rendered task - an exact summary of what the task does (attributes, values, templates, etc.).
- **Rendered Template:** Shows the task's metadata after it has been templated.
- **XCom:** Shows XComs created by that particular `TaskInstance`.
- **List Instances, all runs:** Shows a historical view of task instances and statuses for that particular task.

### Graph

In Airflow version 2.6 and later, the **Grid** view includes an integrated graph visualization of the tasks and dependencies in your DAG. If you select a task or task group instance in the **Grid** column, the graph highlights and zooms to the selected task. You can also navigate complex DAGs using **Filter Tasks** and the minimap. This view is useful to explore the DAG structure and task dependencies.

![Grid graph](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_graph.gif)

> ### Gantt

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this subsection. The Gantt view is pretty self-explanatory, I never hear questions about it, and there aren't really actions you can take from it.

The **Gantt** tab shows the duration of each task instance in a DAG run as a Gantt chart. This view is often used to quickly identify which tasks cause a DAG to run long and which tasks were running in parallel.

![Grid gantt](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_gantt.png)

### Code

> Under the **Code** tab you can access the code generating the DAG you are viewing. While your code should live in source control, the **Code** tab provides a quick insight into what is going on in the DAG. DAG code can't be edited in the UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under the **Code** tab you can access the code that generates the DAG you are viewing. While your code should live in source control, the **Code** tab provides a quick insight into what is going on in the DAG. DAG code can't be edited in the UI.
```

![Grid code](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_code.png)

This tab shows code only from the file that generated the DAG. It does not show any code that may be imported in the DAG, such as custom hooks or operators or code in your `/include` directory.

### Logs

To access the [logs](logging.md#log-locations) of a specific task instance, click on the **Logs** tab which appears in the **Grid** view, as soon as you select a task instance.

![Grid logs](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_logs.gif)

> ### Actions

Reviewer 2: Let's move this up below the Details subsection, since it's about Task Instances, I think it directly follows from that.

![Grid filter](/img/guides/airflow-ui_grid_filter.gif)

### Keyboard shortcuts

In Airflow 2.7 keyboard shortcuts where added to the **Grid** view. You can see all available shortcuts by pressing `shift` + `/` while in the **Grid** view.

![Grid view shortcuts](/img/guides/airflow-ui_shortcuts.png)

## Additional DAG views

The following are the additional DAG views that are available, but not discussed in this guide:

- **Calendar** view: Shows the state of DAG runs overlaid on a calendar. States are represented by color. If there were multiple DAG runs on the same day with different states, the color is a gradient between green (success) and red (failure).

![Calendar View](/img/guides/2_4_CalendarView.png)

- **Task Duration:** Shows a line graph of the duration of each task over time.
- **Task Tries:** Shows a line graph of the number of tries for each task in a DAG run over time.
- **Landing Times:** Shows a line graph of the time of day each task started over time.
- **Details:** Shows details of the DAG configuration and DagModel debug information.
- **Audit Log:** Shows selected events for all DAG runs.

## Cluster activity tab

> The cluster activity tab was added in Airflow 2.7 and shows metrics aggregated about the entire Airflow cluster. There are live metrics available such as currently occupied slots in different [pools](airflow-pools.md), unpaused DAGs and scheduler health.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cluster activity tab was added in Airflow 2.7 and shows aggregated metrics for the entire Airflow cluster. There are live metrics available such as currently occupied slots in different [pools](airflow-pools.md), unpaused DAGs and scheduler health.
```

> The historical metrics shown include states of past DAG runs, task instances and through which trigger DAGs were run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The historical metrics shown include states of past DAG runs, task instances and how DAGs runs were triggered.
```

This guide provided a basic overview of some of the most commonly used features of the Airflow UI. 

The Airflow community is consistently working on improvements to the UI to provide a better user experience and additional functionality. Make sure you upgrade your Airflow environment frequently to ensure you are taking advantage of Airflow UI updates as they are released.

> ## Legacy: Graph view

Reviewer 2: I think we can just add a note about this in the Graph section above, and remove this section. Even though lots of people won't be on 2.7 right away, this is pretty self explanatory.
